PEP 787: Safer subprocess usage using t-strings (#4368)
python/peps: peps/pep-0787.rst

PEP: 787

> Title: Safer subprocess usage using t-strings

Reviewer: I don't think the PEP makes shlex any safer than it already is.

Author: Alyssa Coghlan <ncoghlan@gmail.com>, Nick Humrich <nick@humrich.us>
Discussions-To: Pending
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Requires: 750

> Created: 11-Apr-2025

Reviewer 2: This is the date the PEP number was assigned.
```suggestion
Created: 13-Apr-2025
```

> Python-Version: 3.14

Reviewer 2: Time is short:

The beta feature freeze is in just over 3 weeks, and in that time this PR needs merging (we can do that quickly), then you need to open and guide the discussion thread, potentially update the PEP and iterate, submit to the SC, await their decision, then open a PR with changes to CPython, and have that reviewed and merged before 6th May. 

Therefore I suggest you work on the implementation in parallel. Note that PEP 750 hasn't been merged yet, or even a PR opened, so you'll need to branch off the reference implentation branch (linked in the PEP).

Reviewer: I suspect if we're going to hit controversy, it's going to be in relation to the `shell=True` behaviour with non-POSIX shells (there are good reasons the PEP 750 authors declined to make this shell quoting proposal part of the base t-string PEP). If PEP 787's position of "it's still markedly better than the status quo, even though it doesn't fix everything everywhere" isn't accepted, then yeah, this is going to slip to 3.15.

I'm not overly concerned about the implementation side of things - the quoted code in the PEP really is pretty much everything the reference implementation needs (aside from test case additions).

Reviewer 3: I suggest expecting 3.15 for this one as APIs with security implications require thought. 

Even if it is markedly better than the status quo if a behavior is determined to be wrong or unsupportable once this ships, it becomes a breaking change for someone if we fix the behavior in the future.

Reviewer 3: FWIW even if not fully plumbed through subprocess yet, I think allowing `shlex.join` to take a Template as input would be an interesting stdlib improvement on its own as maybe something to do before this whole PEP lands?  something to ponder.

Author: I don't understand the usefulness of adding Template support to join. Could you provide an example perhaps?

By extending subprocess to handle t-strings natively, we make it easier to write secure code without sacrificing
the convenience that led many developers to use potentially unsafe f-strings.

Specification
=============

This PEP proposes two main additions to the standard library:

1. A new ``sh()`` renderer function in the :mod:`shlex` module for safe shell command construction
2. Adding t-string support to the :mod:`subprocess` module's core functions,
    particularly :class:`subprocess.Popen`, :func:`subprocess.run`, and other related functions
    that accept a command argument

Renderer for shell escaping added to :mod:`shlex`
-------------------------------------------------

As a reference implementation, a renderer for safe POSIX shell escaping will be added to
the :mod:`shlex` module. This renderer would be called ``sh`` and would be equivalent to
calling ``shlex.quote`` on each field value in the template literal.

Thus:

.. code-block:: python

  os.system(shlex.sh(t"cat {myfile}"))

would have the same behavior as:

.. code-block:: python

  os.system("cat " + shlex.quote(myfile)))

> The implementation would be:
> 
> .. code-block:: python
> 
>   def sh(template: TemplateLiteral):
>       def render_field(value, format_spec, conversion_spec)
>           field_text = format(value, format_spec, conversion_spec)
>           return quote(field_text)
>       return template.render(render_field=render_field)
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Copy-and-paste error from PEP 501, the PEP 750 implementation is the one below.

The addition of ``shlex.sh`` will NOT change the existing admonishments in the
:mod:`subprocess` documentation that passing ``shell=True`` is best avoided, nor the

> reference from the :func:`os.system` documentation the higher level ``subprocess`` APIs.

Reviewer 4: Missing a word, maybe:
```suggestion
reference from the :func:`os.system` documentation to the higher level ``subprocess`` APIs.
```

> Then implementation would look like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The t-string processor implementation would look like:
```

.. code-block:: python

>     from string.templatelib import Template, Interpolation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    from string.templatelib import Template, Interpolation
```

>     def sh(template: Template) -> str:

Reviewer 4: I don't understand why there are two different implementations here, both of which are apparently supposed to become `shlex.sh`.

Reviewer: Copy-and-paste error from PEP 501 (the first implementation uses the PEP 501 implementation, not the PEP 750 one)

        parts: list[str] = []
        for item in template:

>         if isinstance(item, Interpolation):

Reviewer 4: Misindented

>                 parts.append(quote(str(item.value)))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                # shlex.sh implementation, so shlex.quote can be used directly
                parts.append(quote(str(item.value)))
```

            else:
                parts.append(item)

>         return "".join(parts)

Author: I don't feel like shlex.join makes sense here. Join is intentionally used on a list, and `join(template)` doesn't fit the api in my mind. It feels weird and out of place to me.

>         return "".join(parts)

Reviewer 3: we can save that for a discussion thread.  mostly that a list[str] and a Template are both sequences of items that get processed.  It may not be natural, that's just the association I formed while reading the draft pep.

This allows for explicit escaping of t-strings for shell usage:

.. code-block:: python

    import shlex

>     # Safe shell command construction

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # Safe POSIX-compliant shell command construction
```

    command = shlex.sh(t"cat {filename}")
    os.system(command)

Changes to subprocess module
----------------------------

With the additional renderer in the shlex module, and the addition of template strings,
the :mod:`subprocess` module can be changed to handle accepting template strings
as an additional input type to ``Popen``, as it already accepts a sequence, or a string,
with different behavior for each. In return, all :class:`subprocess.Popen` higher level
functions such as :func:`subprocess.run` could accept strings in a safe way

> (at least on :ref:`POSIX systems <pep-0787-defer-non-posix-shells>`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(on all systems for `shell=False` and on :ref:`POSIX-compliant shells <pep-0787-defer-non-posix-shells>`
for `shell=True`).
```

For example:

.. code-block:: python

  subprocess.run(t"cat {myfile}", shell=True)

would automatically use the ``shlex.sh`` renderer provided in this PEP. Therefore, using
``shlex`` inside a ``subprocess.run`` call like so:

.. code-block:: python

  subprocess.run(shlex.sh(t"cat {myfile}"), shell=True)

would be redundant, as ``run`` would automatically render any template literals
through ``shlex.sh``

> Alternatively, when ``subprocess.Popen`` is run without ``shell=True``, it could still
> provide subprocess with a more ergonomic syntax. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When ``subprocess.Popen`` is called without ``shell=True``, t-string support would still
provide subprocess APIs with a more ergonomic syntax. For example:
```

.. code-block:: python

  subprocess.run(t"cat {myfile} --flag {value}")

> would be equivalent to:

Reviewer 4: except it would still invoke a shell?

Author: No. Not in this case. Do I need to make that more clear?

Reviewer 4: I am a little confused by the two different implementations for `def sh` above, at least one of which returns a string.

Reviewer 4: But yes it's clear this wouldn't invoke a subshell; you say below that it'd `shlex.split` the string after. We can resolve this.

.. code-block:: python

  subprocess.run(["cat", myfile, "--flag", value])

or, more accurately:

.. code-block:: python

  subprocess.run(shlex.split(f"cat {shlex.quote(myfile)} --flag {shlex.quote(value)}"))

It would do this by first using the ``shlex.sh`` renderer, as above, then using
``shlex.split`` on the result.

> The implementation inside ``subprocess.Popen._execute_child`` would check for t-strings:

Reviewer 3: This particular `_execute_child` code path bothers me... It significantly raises the profile of the `shlex` module's logic by making its use common-place yet implicit.  I do not have a strong reason to believe `shlex` is robust or that it implements behaviors fully matching what people writing command strings inline (in any form, even before t-strings) might expect. When use of `shlex` was explicit, it at least provides some signal to people understanding code that they should check what actual behavior those APIs have.

When using a t-string the behaviors become action at a distance.  Good for presenting a user friendly API face, allowing better code than what they may have written before, but also with the _caveat_ of potential security implications surprise when it doesn't match expectations.

There seems to be no way to plumb through flags like posix= or punctuation_chars= to the underlying shlex API.  That shlex has such options is already a sign that all behaviors are not as rosy as they seem?

We should cover these issues in the PEP.

Author: You don't need to plumb through such characters anymore because t-strings don't have to be "quoted". Also, we are only calling `quote`, which doesn't require knowledge of posix or punctuation characters. I do understand your concerns about adding shlex is possibly an added concern for lack of understanding as to what is going on.

.. code-block:: python

    from string.templatelib import Template, Interpolation

    if isinstance(args, Template):
        import shlex
        if shell:
            args = shlex.sh(args)
        else:
            args = shlex.split(shlex.sh(args))

Backwards Compatibility
=======================

This change is fully backwards compatible as it only adds new functionality without altering existing behavior.
The subprocess module will continue to handle strings and lists in the same way it currently does.

Security Implications
=====================

This PEP is explicitly designed to improve security by providing a safer alternative to using
f-strings with shell commands. By automatically applying appropriate escaping based on context
(shell or non-shell), it helps prevent command injection vulnerabilities.

However, it's worth noting that when ``shell=True`` is used, the safety is limited to
POSIX-compliant shells. On Windows systems where cmd.exe or PowerShell may be used as the shell,

> the escaping mechanism provided by :func:`shlex.quote` may not be sufficient to prevent all forms

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the escaping mechanism provided by :func:`shlex.quote` is not sufficient to prevent all forms
```

=================

This feature can be taught as a natural extension of t-strings that demonstrates their practical value:

1. Introduce the problem of command injection and why f-strings are dangerous with shell commands
2. Show the traditional solutions (list-based commands, manual escaping)
3. Introduce the ``shlex.sh`` renderer for explicit shell escaping:

   .. code-block:: python

       # Unsafe:
       os.system(f"cat {filename}")  # Potential command injection!

       # Safe using shlex.sh:
       os.system(shlex.sh(t"cat {filename}"))  # Explicitly escaping for shell

4. Introduce the subprocess module's native t-string support:

   .. code-block:: python

       # Unsafe:
       subprocess.run(f"cat {filename}", shell=True)  # Potential command injection!

       # Safe but verbose:
       subprocess.run(["cat", filename])

       # Safe and readable with t-strings:
       subprocess.run(t"cat {filename}", shell=True)  # Automatically escapes filename
       subprocess.run(t"cat {filename}")  # Automatically converts to list form

The implementation should be added to both the shlex and subprocess module documentation with clear
examples and security advisories.

> .. _pep-9999-defer-non-posix-shells:

Reviewer 4: Please update this to 787
